---
title: CS 401
subtitle: >
    A collection of my notes for CS 401 Algorithms
---

# Notes
* Stable matching problem:
    * Could one design a college admissions process, or a job recruiting process that was self-enforcing.

- [13-September-2018](cs401/13-September-2018)
- [18 September 2018](cs401/18-September-2018)
- [20 September 2018](cs401/20-September-2018)
- [27 September 2018](cs401/27-September-2018)
- [4-October-2018](cs401/4-October-2018)

## 11 September 2018
* Graph algorithms.
* Breadth first search:
    * explore outwards from $s$ in all possible directions, adding nodes one layer at a time.
    * $i^th$ ($s_i$) layer is exactly at distance $i$ from $s$
    * $T$ is a BFS tree of $G = (V,E)$, $(x, y)$ are two vertices, then in the tree they will only be one layer apart.
        * Because once one of them is discovered, then the next will either be at the same layer or in the immediate next layer.
    * Use a queue and a set of unvisited nodes to process the nodes one layer at a time.
    * Runs in $O(m + n)$:
        * Every edge is considered at most twice.
        * So, to consider all the edges, it's $2m$ (where $m$ is the number of edges).
        * Number of neighbors to check at a node is the degree of the node, $deg(u)$, the sum of all the degrees is $\Sigma{u\epsilon{v}}deg(u) = 2m$
        * And you visit each edge: $n$
* Connected components:
    * maximal subset of a graph where all vertices are connected to each other with a path.
    * We can use BFS to find the connected components of a graph:
        * From every node, run BFS and see all the nodes it reaches. When it doesn't reach a node, it is not a part of that connected component.
        * Running time: $O(n + m)$:
            * Suppose there are $k$ connected components, with vertices: $n_1 .. n_k$  and edges: $m_1 .. m_k$
    * Flood fill algorithm can use BFS.
* Bipartite graph:
    * An undirected graph is bipartite if you can split the graph in two sets such that every edge connects a vertex in one to the other.
    * Testing bipartiteness:
        * a bipartite graph does not contain cycles with odd length.
        * Trees are always bipartite.
        * A graph is bipartite if and only if it does not have an odd cycle.
        * let $G$ be a connected graph, and let $L_0, ..., L_k$ be the layers produced by BFS starting at node s. Exactly one of the following holds:
            1. No edge of G joins two nodes of the same layer, and G is bipartite
            2. An edge of G joins two nodes of the same layer, and G contains an odd-length cycle (and hence is not bipartite.)
            * Starting from the two endpoints with the edge on the same layer, work back up along the BFS tree and find the meeting point. There will be two paths of the same length + the edge connecting the two. Therefore an odd cycle. Property 2 holds
            * Colour the vertices starting from the root in alternating colors, so if there is an edge with both endpoints in the same color, it is not bi-partite. Property 1 holds.
* Connectivity in directed graphs:
    * Directed reachability: Given a node $s$, find all nodes reachable from $s$.
    * Find the shortest directed path.
    * Strong connectivity: Nodes u, v and mutually reachable if there is a edge from u to v and v to u.
    * A graph is strongly connected if every pair of nodes is mutually reachable.
    * Lemma: is s can reach every other node and every other node can reach s, it is strongly connected.
    * Algorithm $O(m + n)$:
        * pick any $s$
        * Run BFS from $s$.
            * gives all the nodes reachable from $s$
        * Run BFS from $s$ but reverse all the edges.
            * gives all the nodes that can reach $s$.
        * If the same nodes show up, then it is strongly connected.
* DAGs(Directed Acyclic Graph) Topological sorting:
    * A directed graph with no directed cycles.
    * Topological order: a total ordering of it's nodes $(v_1, v_2, .., v_n)$ so that every edge $(v_i, v_j)$ we have $i < j$
    * A graph is a DAG iff it has a topological order.
